University of Maryland journalism
professor mark Feldstein examines the
feud between President Richard Nixon and
investigative journalist Jack Anderson
in his new book poisoning the press
King's English bookshop in Salt Lake
City Utah hosts this hour-long event
hello everyone my name is Anne Holman
and on behalf of all of the booksellers
at the King's English I'd like to
welcome you to the 15th Street gallery
this evening we're happy to have c-span
with us which happens every once in a
while when we have a great book like we
have tonight the book were here to
discuss tonight is so jam-packed with
facts and gossip as I was reading it I
kept saying out loud oh my god but I
probably said things worse than that but
I couldn't believe I mean you can open
this book to any page and say to
yourself there's no way that could have
happened in the United States of America
or maybe it could most of us have a
pretty good idea of who Richard Nixon
was or at least who we thought he was
but who was Jackie Anderson it really
depends on who you ask doesn't it mark
Feldstein is with us this evening to
shed light on these two men and what
they started
oh those many years ago Feldstein is
eminently qualified to take on the
subject of the media he's currently a
professor of journalism at George
Washington University on his way to the
University of Maryland he's won numerous
awards and as an investigative reporter
over the past 20 odd years my favorite
being the Edward r murrow achievement
award ladies and gentlemen please join
me in welcoming marked Palestine
[Applause]
thank you very much in and it's great to
be here and what a cool book shop you
have here in Salt Lake City the home of
Jack Anderson who most of our audience
has no idea who he was and most people
under the age of 60 have no idea who he
was but he was the most important most
famous journalist who no one's ever
heard of today but maybe that'll change
now the title of my book poisoning
depressed Richard Nixon Jack Anderson in
the rise of Washington's scandal culture
the phrase poisoning the press comes
from what literally was a plot a White
House plot to poison a journalist I know
it's hard
but it was it's one of the most bizarre
and least known chapters in American
political history but it really happened
Richard Nixon's White House was so
frustrated with columnist jack anderson
who is the leading investigative
reporter of his day with so many of his
expose is that embarrassed not only
embarrassed the administration but since
did two of Nixon's top advisors the
Attorney General of the United States
and the CIA director and in a pleading
guilty of forkin being convicted of
crimes that they actually plotted to
kill him that was the ultimate
escalation in a long war that really
went back twenty-five years but two men
whose names you may remember gordon
Liddy and E Howard hunt met a block from
the White House in the hay-adams Hotel
and they met with the CIA poison expert
and they discussed various ways to
poison Anderson in a way that it
wouldn't show up in an autopsy in his
body and they did more than just talk
about it
they actually acted upon it they
followed Anderson they tailed him from
his his office in downtown Washington
all the way to his home in Bethesda
Maryland and the suburbs to see the
route he drove and to see where they
could stage an auto crash crashes he ran
into his car from behind so would flip
over crash and burn
they then staked out his house looking
for what Howard hunt called
vulnerabilities where they could break
in and poison him in his house and they
wrote up a report for the White House
and for the special counsel of the
president Charles Colson who we all know
today is the born-again Christian who
advised the Bush White House but it was
called off at the last minute because
the burglars were charged with something
more important to do and a few weeks
later they did if they were arrested at
the Watergate Hotel had they not been
caught had they not been imprisoned had
the Nixon administration not toppled as
a result Jack Anderson might have done
a mysterious death and nobody but the
conspirators themselves would ever have
known what happened so how do we get to
that point where a president of the
United States or at least his aides his
advisers his White House you know top
men felt that there was the signal from
on high to plot this mafia hit this rub
out of a journalistic critic well it
really goes back to their 25-year battle
that started when you know Nixon first
entered public life and Anderson dogged
him all the way through the infamous
checkers speech that maudlin tearful
speech where he invoked his dog checkers
I don't care what anyone says we're
gonna keep her for his daughters and we
went back to an expose that Jack
Anderson and his boss dug up about a
slush fund Nixon had and what was really
a form of institutionalized bribery and
Nixon kept being pursued by Anderson who
did stories about his mob connections
and mob money he got in the 1950s who
did stories about money from Howard
Hughes the billionaire and favors done
in in return who in 1960 on the eve of
the election everybody talks about how
50 years ago the Kennedy Nixon debates
allowed Kennedy to win that nobody talks
about what's in my book which is how
Jack Anderson in hand-in-glove with the
Kennedys did a last-minute election eve
expose about Nixon's financial scandals
that may have been just as pivotal as
the presidential debates in the closely
fought election and this dirty trick it
involved a break-in much like Watergate
came two years after Anderson himself
was caught bugging in a Washington hotel
room so this bugging in this burglary
really stoked Nixon's paranoia convinced
him that he needed dirty tricks like the
Democrats had like his enemy Jack
Anderson used
and in many ways help sow the seeds of
of what would you know become the
Watergate scandal that that brought him
down ironically they had very similar
childhoods Nixon and Anderson they were
both Western boys born just 30 miles
apart in California Southern California
but the Anderson family moved here to
Salt Lake City or the outskirts called
Cottonwood and he was raised in a strict
Mormon Church the same way Nixon was
raised with a strict fundamentalist
Quaker orthodoxy they both had these
volatile authoritarian fathers but they
reacted in different ways Nixon sort of
would maneuver and manipulate his father
and avoid to avoid angering him Anderson
would defy his father and this would
shape their later cycle psychology's and
and the way they handled power Nixon
came to the White House with the same
kind of manipulative deceptive approach
that he took with his father Anderson
with a hatred for authority in the abuse
of power as he saw it
and so they reacted in these very
different ways to their similar
childhoods they both came to Washington
right after World War Two 1947 and they
both would get embroiled in some of the
biggest brawls journalistic and
political over the next 25 years
they both rose to power through slashing
attacks on their opponents and they both
became these implacable foes against
each other so that's the story when they
each assume the highest office in their
respective professions in 1969 Nixon
becomes president
Anderson becomes the columnist who runs
the Washington merry-go-round
it's syndicated in more than a thousand
newspapers at its height and nobody can
control Jack Anderson no single editor
or publisher can censor him newspapers
would occasionally spike him The
Washington Post put him on the comics
page there's a kind of insult to show
their disdain but he was like the
WikiLeaks of his day nobody could stop
him and he would get classify
documents if you had dirt in Washington
you knew there was one place to go Jack
Anderson because the rest of the
mainstream media at the time
establishment media didn't report on
scandals didn't disclose national
security secrets didn't publish
documents let alone with Jackie Anderson
did he'd hand them out at press
conferences he would demand to testify
before congressional committees and
grand juries it would vary ibly be
convened in the wake of his expose as he
viewed himself not just as a chronicler
of events but as a shaper of events and
he injected himself into the fray with
glee
they don't make him like Jack Anderson
anymore and rich and he epitomized
everything that Richard Nixon loathed
and feared and when Nixon became
president Anderson went after him hammer
and tong just as he had before he was in
the White House and in three four months
span he exposed some of his deepest
darkest secrets he published classified
documents showing how the US was
secretly arming Pakistan which then is
now as this dictatorship making this
pact with the devil the difference was
is that Nixon was hiding it from the
American people and lying to them and to
Congress and even to his own cabinet
about what he was doing but Anderson had
a mole in the White House and the mole
slipped him these classified documents
and he published them and he won the
Pulitzer Prize for an embarrassed the
White House and then soon after he
published yet another expose of secret
cash that Nixon was receiving that was
used to from from Howard Hughes the
eccentric billionaire industrialist that
was used to pay for earrings for Pat
Nixon cash for his brothers and a
secretary and drove Nixon into a fury
and then he finally exposed a smoking
gun memo that showed that the Republican
National Committee was convention was
getting this four hundred thousand
dollar pledge in exchange for weakening
antitrust action against ITT the biggest
in one of the biggest conglomerates in
the world at that time
so all of these things came together and
Nixon was enraged first they tried to
prosecute him under the Espionage Act
but Anderson black
the white house with dirt that he had
that he would that he threatened to
reveal if they went after him or his
source so the White House had to back
off then
Nixon's men tried disinformation they
they altered a photo to put Anderson in
it to try to implicate him and
wrongdoing they concocted fake documents
on White House stationery that they sent
to him to try to get him to go with the
story that was bogus they even discussed
in the White House tapes show this god
bless the White House tapes they even
show them talking about breaking into
his office and typing these bogus
mammals on Anderson's typewriter so they
could not only show that the store was
false but that Anderson concocted the
documents himself
luckily Anderson had his own
source in the White House who told him
the memos were false so he didn't go
with it they planted a spy in his office
to try to rifle through and spy on what
he was doing
they even sexually smeared him as a
homosexual it was a ludicrous notion he
was a devout Mormon nine kids but Nixon
on the White House tapes who and Nixon
was obsessed with homosexuality there is
this homophobia that runs throughout the
book this kind of recurring leitmotif
and Nixon was convinced that the the
Mormon source who was leaking these
classified documents to him who was also
you know a teetotaling fund you know
religious devout religious Mormon what
and Anderson were gay lovers the
relationship was sexual up the ass as
Nixon put it in delicately on the White
House tapes could you make this stuff up
and he orders his aides to follow
Anderson and catch him in bed with his
source never happened but that didn't
work when they can't prove Anderson's
gay he tells his aides to smear Anderson
as gay anyway that doesn't work nobody
Falls for it the Washington Post even
does a story about their clumsy efforts
to smear Anderson
they SiC the CIA on Anderson illegally
the CIA bylaws only allowed to spy
abroad on foreign spies instead 16
agents round the clock 24/7 were going
after Anderson spying on his staff
spying on his family well Anderson
discovered what was happening that
didn't work he sicked his he had nine
kids most of them were teenagers then he
SiC them on the CIA and they had a ball
they you know came up to the agents they
took their picture they waved dead and
they snuck up from behind and let the
air out of their tires they dressed like
their father they put on a trench coat
and a hat and they jumped into several
different automobiles at the same time
and screeched off in different
directions so the CIA would think one of
them was their father and not know which
one to chase and they got into chase
scenes in their suburban Washington home
and Anderson made sport of it all in his
column so finally in frustration the
Nixon White House turned to this
assassination plot it's the kind of
story you couldn't make up if it were
fiction nobody would believe it but it's
true
and it's not very well known that's the
story of poisoning the press and that's
where the title comes from but I also
use the title as a metaphor - the
poisoned media culture that we have
today and I trace its origins back to
this battle between Nixon and Anderson
because even though there are many
larger institutional forces that have
led to the kind of scandal culture that
we have today in Washington you know the
growth of the media technology the
internet cable you know 24/7 shout TV
all that craziness you know has law out
larger and deeper causes and so for that
matter in the political side the sort of
propaganda machine of the White House
and the spin control and attack rooms
and war rooms that that politicians set
up to deal with the media in many ways
you can trace it back to Nixon and
Anderson in their battle Nixon the
representative of politicians Anderson
representative of the press and while
they were outliers for their time
extreme examples for their time the
techniques they pioneer
would really be imitated by both
politicians and by journalists Nixon
started the White House modern
propaganda machine the the line of the
day message that all administration's
while White House has now used from you
know from Nixon on to Obama and the
attack via the war room as Nixon put at
the attack machine is that all campaigns
use now to slap down the press and the
press meanwhile which is once disdained
Jack Anderson's technique would you know
which include you know rifling through
garbage and eavesdropping and you know
all that stuff would start to imitate it
and this tabloid culture that sort of we
all know today and has has spun so out
of control so this story of bribery and
blackmail burglary and bugging forgery
sexual smears assassination plots really
wasn't just a bazaars tale of the past
it's something that really left its mark
for today and in many ways what we have
today in the modern scandal culture is
really Richard Nixon's ultimate revenge
on all of us you know it was his idea
Fox News he didn't call it Fox News but
the idea of a fourth conservative news
network because he planted the idea of
liberal media bias that he was the first
one to really talk about that and Fox
News was his idea he went to Howard
Hughes to fund it and it didn't happen
for a generation until his television
guru Roger Ailes made it happen
Dick Cheney got his start with Richard
Nixon Donald Rumsfeld got to start with
Richard Nixon Karl Rove all these modern
players and all that they brought good
and good or ill I tend to think more for
hill started with Richard Nixon and it
started with Jack Anderson in their
battle so that's what my books about
I've talked long enough I'd love to hear
your questions and see if I can answer
if you can please just go on up to the
mic and I'll do my best thank you for
listening I hope you enjoy the book
there's a lot of good dirt in there a
lot of
sexual gossip you know J Edgar Hoover
and please come on over to the
microphone so so c-span can get you j
edgar Hoover rifled through Hoover's
trash you know Hoover called him a
vulture and a jackal and a skunk and a
rat animal imagery so please yes my name
is Clark light and I live here in the
valley and I had the pleasure of living
with the Andersons in Bethesda Maryland
for one summer and subsequently
maintained a relationship over the years
and most of what you said so far is
right on I mean it's really that's the
way it was
I was cautioned about certain things in
the household with respect to the siege
that was underway upon them and way to
handle the telephone calls and you know
watch for mysterious cars their defense
was their children and the big family
and they invited all kinds of people in
and out of the home it was like a hotel
and they figured the more people are
coming going friends and family on that
basis the less security issues they were
going to have so that's very true when
the question I have is is not clear to
me now if Jack Anderson ever met Richard
Nixon personally had any personal
exchanges with him is so if you have
background on that I'd be most curious
it's a good question it's a short answer
though I write about it in my book they
all had only a handful of encounters and
and that was because Nixon did not like
the press unlike JFK and you know other
politicians who enjoyed reporters
company Nixon disdained even the ones
who were on his side and Anderson didn't
understandably didn't like to spend much
time with his prey and that's you know
what Nixon was for him prey so the last
time they saw a show there was at the
funeral of Willard Marriott the hotel
magnate and Jackie Anderson was an usher
at the funeral and Nixon saw him when he
thought you know growled here was
Anderson who was his you know number one
enemy was that
top of Nixon's enemies list you know his
top aides said of all Nixon's enemies
Jackie Anderson occupied the number1
spot so not too many face-to-face
encounters but that didn't stop all this
Sabrosa warfare and you know in the
spotlight warfare as well so the the
intricacies of the relationships back
they were very interesting because you
mentioned Willard Marietta
Jack Anderson was in the Chevy Chase LDS
Ward latter-day Saint Yan search warrant
and there's actually a group of people
from Salt Lake in the 30s who went back
there and they they housed themselves on
a certain cul-de-sac in Northwest
Washington and they were sir the fathers
of this Chevy Chase Ward and it was a it
was a collective spot where the powerful
LDS people attended church and if I can
just jump in and of course please if any
of you else have questions once you just
come on up behind the microphones so
that we don't waste time going back and
forth and a lot of Anderson's best
sources were members of the Mormon
Church like him because you know there
are many Mormons in Washington in the
Pentagon and the CIA you know throughout
the national security establishment and
a lot of his best sources were Mormons
and he would appeal to them to something
higher than merely the law but to God
that they had a duty to leaked documents
to him to keep public officials
accountable and he was very successful
doing that and the Nixon administration
realized this and became very paranoid
even though Mormons were some of his
biggest supporters there are some real
slurs against Mormons that Nixon made on
the White House days anyway thank you
for sharing your personal story I see
some people behind you with questions
but yeah the University of Utah student
political science you showed a tape from
a news clip earlier in class today about
about the FBI requesting files from
the Anderson family and stuff it never
didn't really kind of conclude I just
kind of curious what happened with with
that request today their supplier did
the FBI give up and then he just give
some background to the rest of the
audience
who you know didn't see that tape a few
weeks after Jackie Anderson died in
early 2006 the FBI contacted first his
widow and then me and some other
scholars who try to seize the archives
that Jackie Anderson had donated to my
University and they said that there were
class and thank you for your question
but that there you know that there were
classified documents in and in these
boxes and that there was evidence of
crimes of actual espionage and they
wanted to seize those documents to to
prosecute people well this was really
unheard of for the government to go
rifle through the files reporters notes
of a dead journalist and it made
front-page news on the New York Times
all over the world
an editorial condemnation from you know
the right in Fox News to the left you
know Amy Goodman and New York Times and
everybody else in between and Congress
held hearings on this and you know rip
the Bush administration for doing this
this was at the height of the Bush
administration's kind of paranoia about
the press and and they back down the FBI
back down we still don't know to this
day what was going on the Anderson
family felt this was retaliation for
Anderson's attacks on J Edgar Hoover and
who Anderson had been one of the very
few journalists to attack Hoover
although he had previously gotten a lot
of leaks from Hoover and carried water
for Hoover but he turned on Hoover and
he started writing stories exposing
Hoover's corruption and even hinting at
his homosexuality again today we take
that stuff for granted you know the
outing and sex scandals are covered more
than maybe we would like them to be but
you know in the mid twentieth century
that stuff was covered up the press
didn't talk about it the White House
reporters
about Kennedy's womanizing John
Kennedy's womanizing J Jackie Anderson
knew about it but he didn't think that
stuff belongs in a newspaper unless it
affected their sort of public behavior
for the most part he occasionally would
deviate but so but he did with Hoover
and if if you were an enemy of Jack
Anderson's he would sometimes bend the
rules a little on what he was willing to
do Joe McCarthy he outed or tried to out
for being gay and certainly as a boy
Cohen was gay and Anderson outed him
and Anderson put together a file filled
with affidavits from men who claimed
they had sex with Senator Joe McCarthy
he tried attacking McCarthy on the
communism issue he tried to attack you
on the corruption didn't seem to work so
he resorted to homophobia and he passed
these affidavits out to other
journalists a Capitol Hill trying to
stop Joe McCarthy so he you know he he
outed Governor Ronald Reagan's staff for
being gay and he even spread a rumor
that was false that two of Nixon's top
aides were gay so he would engage in
homophobia just as Nixon did about
Anderson and his sources anyway so the
family thought that you know the FBI
raid the two agents that came to my
house so fast their badges was caused by
you know certain Hoover's revenge I'm
not sure I believe that if only because
you know most of Hoover's people were
long gone others thought it was Cheney
and Rumsfeld who had tangled with
Anderson over the years starting and
when they were in the Nixon White House
and that they were you know really
paranoid about classified documents at
this time they were sending people in to
reclassify documents and that they were
responsible I was never able to prove
that I don't know what caused it what I
do know is that they backed off and I'm
glad for that so I hope that answers
your question thank you okay when you
mentioned a document that
maybe hunt put together a whitepaper
were you able to get that no that was
destroyed along with a lot of other
documents right after the Watergate
burglary when these documents were
shredded burned or tossed in the river
in fact Howard hunts wife said that she
burned them rather than shredded them
because she didn't want Jack Anderson
routing through her trash and piecing
them together like he had done with j
edgar Hoover's trash and the second part
was you don't I don't connect Jack
Anderson with Watergate he didn't seem
to be that big of influence at that time
when you know that's sort of the rise of
investigative journalists in it why is
that well that's a great question and
one of the supreme ironies is that
here's Jackie Anderson the Ahab who
stalked the great white whale for 25
years right and then the moment comes
and who actually gets the credit for
impaling the whale not Jack Anderson but
two unknown reporters Bob Woodward and
Carl Bernstein and you know sy Hersh and
others who also did some excellent
coverage and Anderson fell behind on us
er he did have some good scoops on
Watergate but he was hobbled for a
number of reasons one of perhaps one of
the biggest ones was this syndicated
column which had given him so much
independence had allowed him to you know
not be censored was it delayed by
several days because it was put out in
the mail they you know didn't have the
internet that I'm so scoops he would get
you know they were they wouldn't hold it
was a very fast breaking story and he
had several bizarre encounters that he
came close he was actually tipped off in
advance about the Watergate bugging and
and burglary but he kind of botched
following up on it the information was
garbled and so he couldn't do that he
even ran into the burglars a few hours
before they broke in at the Washington's
Airport and they were flying in and they
had the suit he knew two of the burglars
he had done stories with them before in
fact these were two the two Cubans who
were the Nixon people later wanted to
have murder him
but these he read into them in the
airport and one of them was so squirrely
and turning away so he wouldn't
Anderson got suspicious they actually
had a suitcase filled with lock-picking
equipment but Anderson was flying off to
a journalism fraternity conference where
he was a speaker and they were a few
hours later arrested in the Watergate so
he raced to the jailhouse and he tried
to pump his friend and even tried to
post bond and get the guy released into
his house his own custody that didn't
happen the judge wasn't gonna let him
waltz out on the arm of Jackie Anderson
as he put it
so he'd made some efforts but yeah he
really got scooped and once the
Washington Post in The New York Times
you know started getting into the act on
first and Watergate and then after
Watergate everybody wanted the
investigative reporter Anderson lost his
monopoly in Washington and so you had
this irony that now what Nixon Falls he
doesn't get the credit and in fact it
destroys his career no less than Nixon's
he's now marginalized in Washington
because he has this competition for the
first time and so he kind of his career
kind of descends into you know more
tabloid style and you know less
substantive reporting and less scoops to
give a long answer to a short question
two-part though it may have been
Gunderson
you mentioned that Jack Anderson had a
mole in the White House yeah oh you
didn't I saw a headline today that
you're claiming that's John Hudson
senior is that correct yes yes I wasn't
there obviously but Jackie Anderson did
tell me that it was John Huntsman senior
a name that's you know important in Utah
politics not so much nationally but the
father of the former Utah governor
that's right he was a Dade HR Haldeman
Nixon's White House chief of staff so I
mean he didn't slip on documents from
what anderson said in anderson said he
was very brave and idealistic but he did
warn anderson a couple of times about
the nixon people coming after him to
jail him and also to
warned him about these bogus documents
that were being planted in his office
Huntsman Huntsman senior denies it and
you know I wasn't there but it's hard
for me to believe in Jack Anderson would
make this up out of whole cloth mark go
back Jack got the first contact about
four months before the break-in in
February of 72 and he looked into it but
he couldn't get enough information to
pursue it that's right and you know
because you've written a doctoral
dissertation and master's thesis topic
and that night at the airport Washington
National Frank Sturgis knows Frank
Sturgis and he made a mental note to get
back in touch with Sturgis so he's in
Cleveland the next day when he reads
about the break-in and that's right and
Tim is being modest he was a graduate
student who when he was working on this
and the Nixon people the Nixon White
House seized on the fact that Anderson
knew about it in advance and ran into
the burglars ahead of time to plant this
disinformation with Republicans that
Jackie Anderson was actually behind the
Watergate break-in now it sounds
ludicrous today but it was believable
back then because Anderson had this
history of bugging and people could
would believe then that Anderson was
capable of almost anything and and one
of the things I found is that Fred
Thompson the later the senator and
presidential candidate who was in a
counsel to the Republicans on Watergate
committee made much of the fact that
Jack Anderson couldn't find his notes
about how he was tipped off and in fact
he did have his notes
Tim Chambliss you found them back in the
two hundred boxes that he donated art of
archives but anybody who worked with
Jackie Anderson would have known that he
misplaced his notes all the time his
office was a mess so but this conspiracy
theory you can hear the White House
tapes Haldeman and Nixon talking about
how they're going to blame it all on
Jack Anderson and that obviously didn't
work but they tried that - that's right
Jackson his most important story in 50
years of covering
series in the nation's capital was
Watergate well you know as you as
Watergate defined as the battle with
Richard Nixon which went back 25 years I
would agree although he also broke some
other huge stories of his day the CIA
and the Mafia plotting to kill Castro
that was Jack Anderson who broke that
story just focusing upon the break-in of
June 1772 to the end of 1974 he wrote
418 columns you know it was a column
coming out every day 418 columns were
dedicated to Watergate cover yeah she
was pounding away but he wasn't having
the influence that Woodward and
Bernstein were what would Bernstein were
single there were young police reporters
they were free to go after it when they
were told to go cover this story whereas
Anderson had so many stories he had to
deal with that he was restrained and as
a result he couldn't pursue just that
one story where he could be successful
was if he had documents that he could
quote from that the Washington Post the
New York Times would look at and say
okay we're gonna have to give Jackie
Anderson attribution for this so even
though there was a lead time of three to
four days they would have to quote Jack
Anderson in the on the front page and
took more information and the back pages
will look at Jack Anderson's column but
looking at the story that Washington
Post would have it up front
using the Anderson column and having to
give him credit but that was rare well
thank you for pointing all of that out
that's a great contribution and and
you're the leading expert in the state
on this now there any other questions
well I think the c-span cameras are
gonna have trouble hearing you if you do
that that's why they've set this up but
I'd love to hear your questions coming
in late
but you spoke about an assassination
plot against Anderson idea and yeah now
as you gave specific names of people
that were just below Nixon himself right
specifically it identified as being
involved and you made it pretty clear
that you believe that there was no way
that a micromanager like Nixon would not
have known that those key individuals
were in fact talking about - you said
two different possible means by which
they would assassinate multiple means
okay where I want to go with this is as
I look at the Watergate whole affair it
seems to me that the whole purpose that
Nixon had in mind was to actually pick
his opponent in the presidential race
and he was actually trying to maneuver
the situation so that he would face off
against George McGovern who was the
furthest to the left which would allow
Mixon to capture the center in the right
of the country in the electoral states
that mattered and give him another
reelect or give him a reelection now we
know that he took efforts against
Humphrey and they took efforts against
muskie but the person who was leading in
the votes at the time that he was shot
in Bethesda Maryland was actually George
Wallace and to my knowledge there's
nothing that's ever come out about any
attempts by Nixon to derail George
Wallace okay but there are 18 minutes
that are missing on the tapes right well
you face several areas that I'm
basically saying you know do you
consider plausible the theory that was
advanced by people such as John
Schmidt's former congressman after the
assassination attempt on Wallace that
raised serious questions as to the
ability of this loaners to be able to
finance the travels that he was doing
all around the country to follow and
finally put a bullet into George Wallace
which took him out of the race and then
did in fact leave and the governor's the
person running against Nixon okay well
let me and there's you several things in
your question limit let me deal with him
one one at a time
I have not investigated the Wallace
shooting
I find it but I know no information to
suggest that Nixon was implicated in the
Wallis shooting in fact the information
I have suggests that he encouraged
Wallis to run as a Democrat and that
again involves Jackie Anderson so I can
tell you that story in a minute
the second thing you're absolutely right
you know Watergate is a very catch-all
phrase what it really isn't I mean
there's the Watergate burglary you know
which was a sabotage operation a bugging
operation and the cover-up of it but
it's really become a catch-all for what
his attorney general called the White
House all the crimes really that
we're committed so and then finally in
terms of Nixon's culpability in the
Anderson assassination plot let me just
answer that briefly before I talk about
Wallace what we know is that Liddy has
admitted his role in the plot to murder
Anderson
Hunt had been kind of squirrely about it
but gave me an interview that I taped
amounted to a confession really that yes
indeed it was a plot to kill Anderson
and he was involved and as I said
earlier in both action as well as as
talk and they both said that their
orders came from Charles Colson Nixon's
right-hand man now Colson has always
denied that I don't find that denial
very convincing but more and and there
many other things that Colson evidently
has not talked about that he knew about
more importantly is that if you look and
if most historians who have tracked the
Nixon White House have found that almost
all of the actions of Haldeman and
Colson and and Nixon's aides were by
these you know we're at the president's
behest that he was a micromanager that
he hired these younger subordinates who
would carry out his instructions without
question that he didn't keep his
advisors for long periods of time over
the decades because they wouldn't do
that and that it's very unlikely that
they would have acted on their own
for something as sensitive as this
without at least the tacit if not the
explicit instructions of the president I
find that very plausible and the most
plausible explanation
the Wallis story you might want to sit
down for that because it's a little bit
longer George Wallace in 1968 almost
cosmics in the presidency when he ran as
a third party candidate and he siphoned
votes off of Nixon's right flank so
Nixon developed what he called the
Alabama project being because Wallace
was from Alabama he was a segregationist
governor and and the whole purpose of
the Alabama project was to neutralize
George Wallace to keep him from costing
Nixon re-election in 72 he posed the
single greatest threat of anyone so
based on some expose is that Jackie
Anderson had begun suggesting that
Wallace was a crook essentially Nixon's
Internal Revenue Service and Justice
Department began an investigation of
Wallace and his brother and they did
indeed uncover evidence of corruption by
the Wallace brothers and for a short
period anderson managed to have a
honeymoon with nixon and cultivate nixon
through his aide marie jtnar as a
source hard to believe given everything
that had happened but anderson was a
journalistic opportunist a clever one
and when Nixon's aide Mary shot and her
extended an olive branch he was willing
to go along with it if if you leak to me
something that's really good he would
give him a little temporary immunity he
wasn't gonna be permanent immunity so he
said okay here's what I want I want
Wallace's tax files he wanted to follow
up on his expose of Wallace well he knew
perfectly well that was in Nixon's
interest as well as his own and Murray
jotnar did it and it's clear if you read
my book as I you know deconstruct the
chronology Nixon himself had to have
authorized the leak of Wallace's tax
returns that was a felony in fact it was
it was a proposed article of impeachment
against Richard Nixon the leak to Jackie
Anderson
and Anderson ran this big expose about
how Wallace was a crook well soon
thereafter there's a secret meeting
between Wallace and Nixon on Air Force
One and within 24 hours of each other
the Justice Department announces that
it's dropping its investigation of
Wallace and Wallace announces he's not
running as an independent he's going to
run as a Democrat and that was the
single most important event in
reelecting Nixon because it eliminated
the Wallace threat and Wallace
you know divided the Democrats by being
this very racially divisive candidate
that further helps Nixon's re-election
so that was the role that Wallace played
helping Nixon I don't see Nixon or his
men shooting Wallace or trying to make
that happen to get him out of the way he
was doing them more good than harm as he
was running as a Democrat he was never
gonna do anything other than bedevil the
Democrats so to answer your question I
don't buy it you may buy it I don't sir
you had a question I may have a question
but first let me compliment you on the
book it's a great read thank you and of
itself but also I think it's extremely
important that the revelation of how our
system gets gets gets worked and does
work because they're very very important
so thank you buddy here this is a baby a
silly question but you haven't said
anything this evening that would
dissuade me from believing that Jack
Anderson himself was deep throat working
through no you have it working through
surrogates and you talked about the
phrase from the movie follow the money
will follow the brother we have the
Senator Bennet who won at one time took
his turn as being deep throat we now
have Huntsman and you have a person of
Jack Anderson who would love to have
seen the president go down and this was
maybe the issue he saw but as you said
earlier maybe was not in the position to
do it himself just an interesting idea
well you know I mean
Bob Woodward is identified who deep
throat was mark felt I think the whole
notion of deep throat has been grossly
exaggerated and I think Bob Woodward
would agree with that it's become this
mythology almost like Paul Bunyan or
something not that there aren't elements
of truth to it but you know even you
know Woodward's editors said look the
amount of help we got from from Mark
felt or deep throat he didn't know the
identity was really pretty minimal you
know he offered some guidance and this
and that and I think you know Jon
Huntsman's role for Jack Anderson was
similar I mean it wasn't really that
crucial but it added mystery to the
movie and you know a sex appeal and all
that so I mean what really brought Nick
Richard Nixon down wasn't deep throat or
anyone reporter Richard Nixon brought
Richard Hudson down and you know with
with with a judge you threw the book at
them and you know a Democratic Congress
was subpoena power that wanted to get
Nixon and most of all the tapes that
Nixon made of himself that documented
his felonies for all of plasty rity and
every historian thanks God for the Nixon
tapes the gift that keeps on giving okay
well please do it and feel free to email
me and give me your thoughts but thank
you for your questions ken ken Parkinson
what role do you think that the religion
of Richard Nixon played in his life and
the religion of Jack Anderson played in
his life that is a great question you
know and I think they I think it was
huge you know Richard Nixon was raised
as a very devoted Quaker but it wasn't
the kind of classical Quakerism that we
think about of pacifism you know
progressivism Pennsylvania Eastern
Quakerism it was a more revival as
evangelical strain you know he went to
church tent meetings he devoted himself
to Christ and it was a more conservative
doctrine but I think the effect it had
was it gave him a strong sense of
righteousness a self-righteousness and
he made him very difficult for him to
admit
that he made a mistake or he was wrong
in fact one of his advisors said that he
would bleed and die before he would ever
admit that he made a mistake to Jackie
Anderson that's how much he he couldn't
admit wrongdoing he how much he had to
be perfect and I think a lot of that
goes back harkens back to his you know
religious upbringing Anderson even more
I think his religion affected his work I
mean as a devout Mormon he truly
believed as a matter of theology that
the Constitution including the First
Amendment is divinely inspired that he
was here on earth doing God's will it
was a noble calling and that his job to
root out corruption expose and oppose
wrongdoing was his purpose on earth and
that he answered to a higher authority
than merely the law and it was reflected
in his column with this kind of black
and white worldview absolutist worldview
of the world and so I think it's you
know it's hard to overestimate the the
role that that played he didn't care the
way the other rest of the Washington
Beltway crowd did the Washington press
corps what they thought of him if he was
invited to the gridiron clever he cared
what they thought about of him in his
ward his Mormon Ward that he belonged to
his church that's what he cared about
and that gave him an independence and a
freedom that most of Washington's
Beltway Georgetown you know elite crowd
and journalism never had so I hope in
play in well LBJ was the president
Anderson didn't play much of a role when
LBJ was president he didn't have many
dealings with LBJ but his boss Drew
Pearson was very close to LBJ and
actually kind of was co-opted by LBJ for
the only time really in his career by a
president was at the end of his life he
was mellowing he'd always been on the
outside he wanted to be taken in LBJ
made Pierson feel important and special
and stroked his ego and invited him to
the residue
and then LBJ used Pearson to plant dirty
stories about his opponents one that LBJ
leaked to Pearson and Anderson was about
Bobby Kennedy his his his enemy and he
got the FBI to give Jackie Anderson
through J Edgar Hoover documents showing
that Bobby Kennedy had ordered signed
off on the order to wiretap Martin
Luther King and they did this as a last
minute election eve stinkbomb when
Robert Kennedy was running against the
you know against the LBJ war policies in
Vietnam just before the primary to cost
him votes with black voters when Bobby
Kennedy was running as the champion of
the of black and under you know
underprivileged voters so you know they
they could get manipulated and Anderson
in his life like Drew Pearson got
co-opted at the end by another President
Ronald Reagan he grew soft he moved to
the right and he Reagan also cultivated
him in fact Reagan got Anderson to cover
up the biggest scandal and presidential
scandal since Watergate the iran-contra
scandal Anderson found out about it but
he suppressed it because Reagan asked
him to and so like his mentor Drew
Pearson he grew soft at the end you know
and in many ways muckraking is a young
person's game you know you have to have
the righteousness of youth to be willing
to you know crack heads the way the way
these muckrakers did and as these men
mellowed they were much less willing to
do it you know one question I've
frequently been asked is is there
anybody like Jack Anderson today and
there really isn't you know part of it
is that media landscape is so
decentralized so fractured that there's
nobody that commands that large and
audience part of it is that media is so
much more corporate that you don't have
the kind of large
analogies like Anderson they get beat
down it's possible the internet
WikiLeaks might you know turn into
something like Jackie Anderson that
allows kind of unfiltered information
away out but the problem is you also
need journalism you need fat gather you
need people who know how to report find
out you know use those documents as a
starting point not an end point for for
gathering information are there more
questions please come on up to the mic
oh yes check about deep throat
and he just said deep throat is
somewhere high up in the FBI in the
field office in DC or somewhere close to
the director I said how do you know that
says because I'm reading the same
paperwork that would burn Bernstein
reading it's all coming from the field
agents and it's coming through from
somebody very high up it has the
security clearance he didn't say mark
felt didn't say jailer who but some of
his sources in the FBI were very close
to where Woodward merged he knew we're
getting there there's their information
what brought what brought Nixon down was
that combination as you point out
journalistically a relentless press
politically governmental a the House and
the Senate
holding hearings legally judge Sarika
so those three forces but Anderson told
me that he could have still saved
himself if he had destroyed the best
evidence the tapes therefore when it was
relieved but when it was became known in
July late July of 73 the taping system
existed John Conlan said to him burn the
tapes call a press conference have a
bonfire out on the on the in the Rose
Garden and burn the best evidence before
the the best evidence becomes part of
the criminal justice system in the
appeals process didn't happen and as a
result we get to hear the edited
transcripts Bri that had to transfer
and then here the tapes so no that's
that's exactly right and a lot of people
have wondered why did Nixon make the
tapes in the first place so why did he
not destroy them and I think the answers
are connected he had a great deal of
what Freud might call Kennedy energy a
different kind of envy and what Freud
had in mind but in some ways it related
to the same body parts and that was that
Kennedy you know was this glamorized
figure the press loved him he shot down
in the prime of his youth
how can Nixon ever compete with the
Kennedys and the Kennedys have all this
money and this glamour and and he felt
like and damnit you know Kennedy's a
womanizer and they stole the election
and they cheat and they bribe and
they're in bed with the mob what are
they doing
being so mythologized and in Kennedy
even had his own historian Arthur
Schlessinger in-house historian writing
kind of you know hagiographic
biographies of Bobby Kennedy so what was
Nixon's answer how is he going to
compete the White House tapes he would
tape everything he would come back after
he was president he would edit them
selectively put out the best parts that
made him look like the Statesman he
believed he was he never thought he
would lose control he never thought that
you know they were gonna get control he
didn't think of himself as a crook and I
think it was ego ego that got him to
tape-record himself in the first place
and the same ego and hubris that made
him think he could get out of this and
still control the historical record
history ever and he really believed
they'd never be forced to give up his
presidential papers in effects well
that's right another question sir
enjoyed your stimulating conversation -
Jerry fish Charlotte Peron and as a
devout Republican and Mormon I'd like to
think that Nixon still had a chance or
always wondered if it was more the
cover-up or they would have unraveled
the whole thing with just the break-in I
don't think they would have without the
tapes because otherwise it would have
just been essentially John Dean's word
or whoever however high up I mean they
started falling like dominoes but at a
certain point it becomes the word of
some a
versus the President of the United
States who are you gonna believe and you
know had there been no tapes to prove
Nixon's culpability in his own words I
think he could have written it out
I think destroying the tapes would have
saved him and his wife Pat said that
that was the stupidest thing he ever did
it was like love letters you don't keep
them around wasn't it was a Goldwater
said he try to just admit it and right
up front we went out wasting so much
time well that's that's another strategy
that might have worked too especially
you know he was writing so high in 72
he's reelected in a landslide if he said
you know you're right some of my people
did this they were for good motives I
apologize I'm pardoning them you know he
would have had a rough few months but
you know I think he probably could have
written it out he ended up doing the
worst of all possible worlds trying to
cover it up and failing and most of it
coming out I mean there's still there's
still some things that haven't come out
I mean the fact that I've got some new
material in my book this many decades
later says that there'll be some things
that you know and historians always you
know uncover some new evidence and
revise their interpretations well do you
bring up the other question and I think
stew reminded me it's just seemed to me
it seemed ironic at the time daddy won
by a landslide that he was trying to
assure his election right was he and I
thought well maybe was this paranoid but
it was more Machiavellian from what I
hear in other words there are couple
things about it part of it is that when
the strategy first got implemented he
wasn't so far ahead you know he didn't
know he was going to win in a landslide
in fact muskie was beating him and a lot
of the polls early on and that's indeed
why they targeted senator Edmund muskie
and you know Humphrey was strong too and
they targeted him and they didn't well
actually they even targeted McGovern as
as weak a candidate as they thought he
would be and proved to be so pardon so
part of it was there was long term but
the other thing is you know Nixon had
two very close calls already 1960 in
1968 one lost by a whisker one by a
whisker so he didn't take anything for
granted and yes he was paranoid
but as Kissinger liked to joke just
because you're paranoid does not mean
they're not out to get you and Kissinger
was paranoid too as I talked about in my
book he really did say that that was a
joke he was you know witty
although paranoid wittily paranoid or
paranoiac lis witty and but he had
reason to be paranoid and one of them
was you know he had been the subject of
dirty tricks you know with bugging and
and and breakin so you know that there
was that too and he didn't feel like he
could leave anything to chance
personalities we all loved him well you
know Jackie Anderson actually spoke of
Nixon as a split personality that the
shy quiet private Nixon who was who was
sensitive and hurt by these attacks and
the public Knicks in the lacerating
Nixon who didn't quite realize that he
caused these attacks by the own that he
meted out so thank you for your
questions there's another behind you I
was the author of a book about Woodward
and Bernstein I can tell you that the
one of the main reasons why Nixon had
the tape system was Lyndon Johnson who
advised him this is a really easy way to
have this documents of your member from
when you want to write your memoirs it
wasn't even that calculating it was just
it made perfect sense but you know
Woodward and Bernstein get way too much
credit and as Mark said things can come
out later but it doesn't matter once the
mythology is there just like with deep
throat because you know he was a sexy
figure did he contribute that much no
but he was a mystery for 35 years so you
can say that name everyone knows the
real hero I think is Alexander
Butterfield he had worked for Nixon he
was one of the five people who knew
about the taping system he was inventing
the FBI ask some questions and then he
was sent over to the FAA and it was
Alexander Butterfield on
lay enough July 13th 1973 which was a
Friday who was who testified and that
was asked the question was there any you
know he talked about Nixon having a
dictaphone was there anyone know
anything else and he said and he told me
this that he said if they ask me a fuzzy
question because he was a Republican
I'll give him a fuzzy answer but if they
asked me a direct question I'm gonna
give him a direct answer and once he did
that you know that was July 13th by
August you know 8th Nixon resigned and
it was because the Supreme Court came
down with a 8 zipped decision turned the
tapes over so I think it's it's there's
no question that without the tapes Nixon
would have gotten often that they made
all the difference
sorry quit jumping no no I'm glad you
did he made two good points and let me
just respond with two good points the
taping system when Johnson first advised
Nixon to do this
Nixon was disgusted and the first one of
his first acts as president was to order
the taping system ripped out but then as
he was president for a while and he saw
that people said one thing to him and
another thing elsewhere he decided he
wanted the taping system partly to
protect himself as well as the ego and
he ordered them put in but here's the
difference between Lyndon Johnson's
taping system and Richard and JFK's and
the Eisenhower even before that and even
earlier presidents is the president's
controlled the button of when it went on
and when it went off Nixon did not Nixon
was very inept mechanically true no
truly he was awkward and you know and so
they installed what was then the latest
technology voice-activated
taping so the result was they taped
everything I mean if you if you moved
your chair you know and it made a sound
that record the that real started
recording so the result was there were
thousands of hours of tapes you know and
it documented everything including his
crimes so that was you know the problem
there and in fact the mechanical
ineptitude is probably well you know
part of the eighteen and a half men
gap there was this gap of eighteen and a
half minutes in the tapes a few days
after the Watergate break-in and the
expert analyst said that it was erased
five different times this was no
accidental array she was obviously
deliberate and most historians think it
was Richard Nixon himself who did it
again so mechanically inept he had to do
it five times I mean I'm sure he wanted
to make sure whatever it was that was
there was gone and we can speculate
about what was there but no one really
knows the last thing was about deep
throat and you know conspiracy theories
if you will and there are a number of
conspiracy theories with Watergate as
there are with other big events you know
the Kennedy assassination 9/11 you know
there are conspiracy theories you know
and sometimes these conspiracy theories
have merit but I think more often and in
Watergate I I don't buy the conspiracy
theories about Watergate that that it
was a CIA plot to topple Nixon because
or a right-wing plot to topple Nixon
because he was either gonna you know
dismantle the CIA or to stop his
overtures to to the Soviets and the
Chinese or that there was a call-girl
ring that one of Nixon's aides was
running to involved with that they were
trying to cover-up I don't find the
evidence persuasive I looked at that
during my research for this book but
what I think is something larger is that
people want big explanations to big
events President John Kennedy who is
beloved is slain down in the prime of
his youth by this loner weirdo it's too
upsetting to believe you know who of us
is safe you know the president the
United States has toppled it you know
you want some larger explanation and I
think that's where some of these
conspiracy theories are rooted but that
doesn't mean there may not be some new
things to dig up and I like to think I
found some here but I think the
essential contours of what we know about
Watergate
yes correct I think the essential
contours of some of these other things I
haven't studied them in depth but I
suspect the same is true what I do think
is that this is a bias a great yarn the
battle between Nixon and Anderson
Godzilla versus King Kong is with the
New York Times called it in its book
review and if you don't buy into the
larger issues of how this has affected
our poison scandal culture of today and
I hope you will but I hope you'll at
least enjoy the Battle of these two men
you know this is this a have in the
whale of modern times
and I thank you very much for your
patience and listening to me I hope
you'll buy the book and recommend it to
your friends and thank you for coming
out tonight in Salt Lake City
[Applause]
and thank you to my host mark Feldstein
is former investigative correspondent
for CNN and ABC he received two George
Foster Peabody Awards King's English
bookshop in Salt Lake City Utah hosted
the event for more information visit
King's English dot-com every